 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.4
(11/2012)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR 
OF ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Communication process between the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector and 
forums and consortia 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.4 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.4 
Communication process between the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector and forums and consortia 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation describes how to initiate a communication process between ITU-T and a 
forum/consortium. It lists the A.4-qualifying criteria for forums/consortia, and it describes the 
document exchange between A.4-qualified forums/consortia and the ITU-T. 
 
 
 
History 
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group 
1.0 ITU-T A.4 1996-10-18 Assembly  
2.0 ITU-T A.4 2000-10-06 Assembly  
3.0 ITU-T A.4 2002-06-21 TSAG  
3.1  ITU-T A.4 (2002) Amd. 1 2006-07-07 TSAG  
3.2  ITU-T A.4 (2002) Amd. 2 2007-12-07 TSAG  
4.0 ITU-T A.4 2012-11-30 Assembly  
 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 ITU 2013 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Page 
1 Introduction ..................................................................................................................  1 
2 Procedures ....................................................................................................................  1 
2.1 Establishment of the communication process ................................................  1 
2.2 Communication process once established ......................................................  2 
2.3 ITU-T A.4-qualified organizations list ...........................................................  3 
2.4 Copyright arrangements .................................................................................  3 
Annex A – Qualifying criteria for forums/consortia communication process .........................  4 
Appendix I – Establishment of a process for cooperation and exchange of information 
under Rec. ITU-T A.4 ...................................................................................................  5 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) iii 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.4 
Communication process between the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector and forums and consortia 
(1996; 2000; 2002; 2006; 2007; 2012) 
1 Introduction 
The purposes of the International Telecommunication Union are contained in Article 1 of the 
Constitution. These include the aim "to promote, at the international level, the adoption of a broader 
approach to the issues of telecommunications in the global information economy and society, by 
cooperating with other world and regional intergovernmental organizations, and those non-
governmental organizations concerned with telecommunications". 
Also noted are the challenges faced by the Union in achieving its purposes in the changing 
telecommunication environment, both in the period covered by the Strategic Plan for the Union for 
1995-1999 and in the following period, as stated in Resolution 1 (Plenipotentiary Conference, 
Kyoto, 1994). The Annex to Resolution 1 elaborates the Strategic Plan. For the Standardization 
Sector, its strategy includes recognition of the growing influence of industry forums, and a specific 
goal to develop appropriate agreements and cooperative relationships with other organizations, 
including forums. Among the priorities identified for the Sector is the objective "to continue to 
cooperate with other global and regional standardization organizations and industry forums to 
harmonize the development and implementation of global telecommunication standards". 
In order to facilitate the development of cooperative relationships with forums, and to encourage 
information exchange, it is deemed necessary to provide guidance on the means of communication. 
In particular, it is of benefit to establish procedures for use when structuring the communications 
process between ITU-T and forums and consortia. 
WTSA decides that the following procedures be applied. 
2 Procedures 
Study group chairmen are encouraged to engage in two-way communication, where appropriate, 
with representatives of forums/consortia, and to invite presentation to their study groups of the work 
of the forums/consortia, as identified by the study group. 
In addition, procedures have been introduced for a formal communication process between ITU-T 
(or one or more of the study groups) and forums/consortia that qualify according to the criteria in 
Annex A. The communication process permits document exchange between ITU-T and qualified 
forums/consortia. Establishing a communication process provides a framework for ongoing 
communications, in order to: 
– prevent inadvertent duplication of effort, while allowing each organization to pursue its 
own mandate; 
– provide authoritative information regarding one organization's dependencies on the other's 
work; 
– exchange information on topics of mutual interest. 
2.1 Establishment of the communication process 
Establishment of a communication process with a forum/consortium should be considered on a 
case-by-case basis, and should be evaluated with due care and diligence using the set of criteria in 
Annex A. Normally, the process is established at the study group level. In the case of groups 
associated with one or more study groups, the evaluation and decision to proceed should be carried 
  Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 1 
 
out by the lead study group. To avoid multiple requests to a forum/consortium for information 
pertaining to the criteria in Annex A, and to facilitate evaluation by study groups, the Director of 
TSB should make the request to the forum/consortium and subsequently make a preliminary 
analysis of the response. A schematic diagram of the communication process is provided in 
Appendix I. 
2.1.1 Communication process initiated by an ITU-T study group 
If a study group considers that it is beneficial to establish a communication process with a 
forum/consortium, the study group should first check the ITU-T A.4-qualified organizations list 
(see 2.3) and obtain the Director's analysis. The study group shall review the analysis and make a 
decision whether or not to communicate with the forum/consortium. If the forum/consortium in 
question is not on the list, the study group chairman asks the Director to request the 
forum/consortium to provide the information and fill in the questionnaire relating to the qualifying 
criteria set forth in Annex A. The Director performs a preliminary analysis of the forum/consortium 
and transmits it to the affected study group(s), which shall review the analysis and make a decision 
whether or not to communicate. Any areas of concern should be immediately shared with other 
interested study group chairmen and the Director. If the study group decides to approve, the study 
group chairman shall establish the communication process. The study group chairman should 
facilitate the process as described in 2.2. 
2.1.2 Communication process initiated by a forum/consortium 
If a forum/consortium wishes to establish a communication process with a study group, that study 
group should first check the ITU-T A.4-qualified organizations list (see 2.3) and obtain the 
Director's analysis. The study group shall review the analysis and make a decision whether or not to 
communicate with the forum/consortium. If the forum/consortium is not on the list, the procedure 
described for this case in 2.1.1 is applied. Any areas of concern should immediately be shared with 
other interested study group chairmen and the Director. If the study group decides to approve, the 
communication process can be established. The study group chairman should facilitate the process 
as described in 2.2. 
If a forum/consortium contacts the Director of TSB to establish a communication process with 
ITU-T, the Director should first determine whether it is appropriate for: 
a) ITU-T (for related policy issues); or 
b) one or more study groups (for topics relating to their work). 
In case a), the Director evaluates the forum/consortium according to the criteria in Annex A. If the 
Director decides to approve, he shall establish the communication process and inform TSAG and all 
study groups. 
In case b), the Director performs a preliminary analysis and transmits it to the affected study 
group(s), which shall proceed as outlined in the first paragraph of 2.1.2. If multiple study groups are 
involved, the decision of each study group should be communicated to the others, to TSAG and to 
the Director of TSB. 
2.2 Communication process once established 
2.2.1 Documents sent to ITU-T A.4-qualified forums/consortia 
A proposal to send a liaison statement to an ITU-T A.4-qualified forum/consortium can arise from 
work by a rapporteur group, working party or study group. The decision to send such information is 
made by the study group chairman in consultation with the relevant working party chairman, and, if 
arising from a study group meeting, with the agreement of the study group. The documentation is 
sent to the forum/consortium by TSB on behalf of the study group. 
2 Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 
 
When necessary, between scheduled meetings, the liaison statement may be prepared by an 
appropriate correspondence process and approved by the study group chairman in consultation with 
the study group management. 
2.2.2 Documents received from ITU-T A.4-qualified forums/consortia 
Documents submitted to ITU-T by qualified forums/consortia should conform to criterion 8 in 
Annex A. These documents are not issued as Contributions. As soon as they arrive they are made 
available, with the agreement of the study group chairman for advance consideration by the relevant 
group. Moreover, they are issued as a document to the relevant group with a reference to the 
originating forum/consortium, i.e. as a Temporary Document at a study group or working party 
meeting, or as a document at a rapporteur meeting. In the latter case, the receipt and disposition of 
the document received should be recorded in the report of the rapporteur meeting. 
2.3 ITU-T A.4-qualified organizations list 
The Director of TSB is requested to maintain an up-to-date ITU-T A.4-qualified list of the 
forums/consortia that are under evaluation and/or have been approved for the communication 
process, including identification of the study groups concerned, and make it available online. 
2.4 Copyright arrangements 
The subject of modifications to texts and arrangements for royalty-free copyright licenses, including 
the right to sub-license, for texts accepted by either ITU-T or by forums/consortia and their 
publishers and others, is a matter to be agreed upon between TSB and the particular 
forums/consortia. However, the originating organization retains the copyright for its texts. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 3 
 
Annex A 
 
Qualifying criteria for forums/consortia communication process 
(This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
NOTE – An administration may require that "communications" to ITU-T or its study groups, from a 
forum/consortium within that administration's jurisdiction, follow its established national procedures. 
 
Forum/consortium attributes Desired characteristics 
1) Objectives/relationship of work Objectives should refer to use of International Standards/Recommendations, or to the 
to ITU-T work provision of input into international standards organizations, especially ITU-T. 
2) Organization:  
 – legal status; – should indicate in which country/countries it has legal status; 
 – geographic scope; – should be global (i.e., should involve more than one region of the world); 
 – secretariat; – permanent secretariat should exist; 
 – nominated representative. – should be willing to nominate a representative. 
3) Membership (openness) – forums/consortia membership criteria should not preclude any party with material 
interest, especially ITU Member States and Sector Members; 
– membership should comprise a significant representation of telecommunication 
interests. 
4) Technical subject  areas Should be relevant to a particular study group(s) or ITU-T as a whole. 
5) IPR Policy and Guidelines on:  
a) patent; a) should be consistent with "Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC" and 
 "Guidelines for Implementation of the Common Patent Policy for 
 
ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC"*; 
b) software copyright (if b) should be consistent with "ITU-T Software Copyright Guidelines"*; 
applicable); 
 
c) marks (if applicable); and 
c) should be consistent with "ITU-T Guidelines related to the inclusion of Marks in ITU-T 
 
Recommendations"; 
d) copyright. 
d) ITU and ITU Member States and Sector Members should have the right to copy for 
standardization-related purposes (see also Rec. ITU-T A.1 with regard to copying and 
distribution). 
6) Working methods/processes – should be well-documented; 
– should be open and fair; 
– should support competition; 
– should explicitly consider anti-trust issues. 
7) Outputs – outputs available to ITU-T should be identified; 
– process for ITU-T to obtain outputs should be identified. 
8) Documents submitted to ITU-T – should contain no proprietary information (no distribution restriction); 
– should indicate source within the forum/consortium (e.g., committee, subcommittee, 
etc.); 
– should indicate degree  of stability of the document (e.g., preliminary, mature, stable, 
proposed date of adoption, etc.); 
– should indicate degree of approval of document (i.e., per cent of total forum membership 
involved and per cent of total forum membership that approved the document). 
*) Particularly, licences must be offered on a non-discriminatory basis on reasonable terms and conditions (whether free of charge 
or with monetary compensation) to both members and non-members. 
 
4 Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 
 
Appendix I 
Establishment of a process for cooperation and exchange of information under Rec. ITU-T A.4 
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
 
 1 2 3 4
 Initiation  Evaluation  Decision  Process once established 
according to the criteria
= implementation 
 (includes questionnaire in Annex A) 
   
   
2.1.1 Initiation of the request by an SG The SG checks the ITU-T  The SG decides to Communication process 
A.4-qualified list and reviews the communicate put into practice by the SG 
analysis; if not on the list, see 2.1.2 
b) 
    
2.1.2 Initiation of the request by a forum The SG checks the ITU-T  The SG makes a decision to Communication process 
to an SG A.4-qualified list and reviews the approve communication put into practice by the SG 
analysis; if not in the list, see 2.1.2 
b) 
    
2.1.2 a) Initiation of the request by a forum Evaluation by the Director The Director decides to Communication process 
to the Director for related policy approve and informs put into practice by the 
issues TSAG + SGs Director 
    
2.1.2 b) Initiation of the request by a forum The Director performs a  The SG decides to Communication process 
to the Director for SG issues  preliminary analysis, the SG communicate, the SG informs put into practice by the SG 
reviews the analysis other SGs, TSAG and the 
Director 
   
   
Director adds forum under  Director indicates on the list 
evaluation to the list that forum is ITU-T 
A.4-qualified 
     
 
5 Rec. ITU-T A.4 (11/2012) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Terminals and subjective and objective assessment methods 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2013 
