 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.6
(11/2012)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR 
OF ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Cooperation and exchange of information 
between the ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector and national and 
regional standards development organizations 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.6 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.6 
Cooperation and exchange of information between the 
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector and 
national and regional standards development organizations 
 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation describes the establishment of the process for cooperation and information 
exchange between ITU-T and national and regional standards development organizations, and the 
communication process once an organization has been A.6-qualified. 
 
 
History 
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group 
1.0 ITU-T A.6 1998-09-07 TSAG  
2.0 ITU-T A.6 2000-10-06 Assembly  
3.0 ITU-T A.6 2002-06-21 TSAG  
3.1  ITU-T A.6 (2002) Amd. 1 2006-07-07 TSAG  
3.2  ITU-T A.6 (2002) Amd. 2 2007-12-07 TSAG  
4.0 ITU-T A.6 2012-11-30 Assembly  
 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 ITU 2013 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Page 
1 Scope ............................................................................................................................  1 
2 Procedures ....................................................................................................................  1 
2.1 Establishment of the process for cooperation and exchange of information ..  1 
2.2 Process for cooperation and exchange of information once the process is 
established ......................................................................................................  2 
2.3 ITU-T A.6-qualified organizations list ...........................................................  3 
2.4 Copyright arrangements .................................................................................  3 
2.5 Electronic document exchange .......................................................................  3 
Annex A – Qualifying criteria for cooperation and exchange of information process with 
national and regional standards development organizations ........................................  4 
Appendix I – Establishment of a process for cooperation and exchange of information 
under Rec. ITU-T A.6 ...................................................................................................  5 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) iii 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.6 
Cooperation and exchange of information between the 
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector and 
national and regional standards development organizations 
(1998; 2000; 2002; 2006; 2007; 2012) 
1 Scope 
In order to facilitate the development of cooperative relationships with national and regional 
standards development organizations, and to encourage cooperation and information exchange, 
procedures are provided, founded on the basis of reciprocity, for use when structuring the 
cooperation and information exchange process. 
"National and regional standards development organizations", referred to as "standards 
development organizations" (SDOs) in the text that follows, are those organizations that develop 
standards recognized and implemented at the national and/or regional level. In this 
Recommendation, the term "approved document" refers to an official output of a standards 
development organization that has been formally approved. The term "draft document" refers to an 
output, which is still in draft form. 
2 Procedures 
Study groups are encouraged to make use of documents, both approved and in draft form, provided 
by standards development organizations, as appropriate. Similarly, standards development 
organizations are encouraged to make use of draft or approved ITU-T Recommendations. This 
Recommendation contains procedures for formal cooperation and exchange of information between 
ITU-T study groups and standards development organizations that qualify, according to the criteria 
in Annex A. In particular, this Recommendation addresses the case of an organization accepting 
texts, in part or in whole, from another organization. The case of normative referencing is addressed 
in Recommendation ITU-T A.5. Establishing a communication process provides a framework for 
ongoing communications to: 
– prevent inadvertent duplication of effort, while allowing each organization to pursue its 
own mandate; 
– provide authoritative information regarding one organization's dependencies on the other's 
work; 
– exchange information on topics of mutual interest. 
2.1 Establishment of the process for cooperation and exchange of information 
Establishment of a process for cooperation and exchange of information between ITU-T study 
groups and standards development organizations should be considered on a case-by-case basis, and 
should be evaluated with due care and diligence using the set of criteria in Annex A. For ITU-T, the 
process is established at the study group level; for standards development organizations, the process 
is established at the appropriate level. To avoid multiple requests to a standards development 
organization for information pertaining to the criteria in Annex A, and to facilitate evaluation by 
study groups, the Director of TSB makes such requests, and subsequently makes an analysis of the 
responses to verify that the organizations meet the relevant criteria. A schematic diagram of the 
process is provided in Appendix I. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 1 
 
2.1.1 Exchange of information initiated by an ITU-T study group 
If a study group considers that it is beneficial to establish an exchange of information or documents 
with a standards development organization, the study group should first consult the ITU-T 
A.6-qualified organizations list (see 2.3) and obtain an analysis of that standards development 
organization from the Director. The study group reviews the analysis and decides whether or not to 
communicate with the standards development organization. If the standards development 
organization in question is not on the list, the study group chairman asks the Director to request the 
standards development organization to provide the information and fill in the questionnaire relating 
to the qualifying criteria set forth in Annex A. The Director performs a preliminary analysis of the 
standards development organization and transmits it to the affected study group(s), which shall 
review the analysis and make a decision whether or not to communicate. Any areas of concern 
should be immediately shared with other interested study group chairmen and the Director. If the 
study group decides to approve, the study group chairman establishes the cooperation document 
acceptance and exchange processes in accordance with 2.2. 
2.1.2 Exchange of information initiated by a national or regional standards development 
organization 
If a standards development organization contacts the Director of TSB to establish an exchange of 
information or documents with ITU-T, the Director should first determine whether the exchange of 
information or documents is relevant to: 
a) the ITU-T Sector (for related policy issues); or 
b) one or more study groups (for topics relating to their work). 
In case a), the Director evaluates the standards development organization according to the criteria in 
Annex A. If the Director decides to approve, he establishes the exchange and informs TSAG and all 
ITU-T study groups. 
In case b), the Director performs an analysis and transmits it to the affected study group(s), which 
shall review the analysis and make a decision whether or not to communicate. If multiple study 
groups are involved, the decision of each study group should be communicated to the others, to the 
TSAG and to the Director of TSB. 
2.2 Process for cooperation and exchange of information once the process is established 
2.2.1 Documents sent to ITU-T A.6-qualified national and regional standards development 
organizations 
A standards development organization may accept, in whole or in part, the text of a draft or 
approved ITU-T Recommendation, as all or part of the text of its draft document, with or without 
modification to the ITU-T text. 
When a standards development organization decides to accept ITU-T texts, it notifies TSB about 
the actions taken concerning those texts. The use, acceptance or reproduction of such texts by the 
standards development organization is subject to the copyright arrangements set out in 2.4. 
A proposal to send a liaison statement to an ITU-T A.6-qualified standards development 
organization can arise from work by a rapporteur group, working party or study group. The decision 
to send such information is made by the study group chairman in consultation with the relevant 
working party chairman, and, if arising from a study group meeting, with the agreement of the study 
group. The text is sent to the standards development organization by TSB on behalf of the study 
group. 
When necessary, between scheduled meetings, the liaison statement may be prepared by an 
appropriate correspondence process and approved by the study group chairman in consultation with 
the study group management. 
2 Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 
 
2.2.2 Documents received from ITU-T A.6-qualified national and regional standards 
development organizations 
An ITU-T study group may accept from an ITU-T A.6-qualified standards development 
organization, in whole or in part, the text of a draft document, or an approved document, as all or 
part of the text of a draft ITU-T Recommendation, with or without modification to the text. 
When an ITU-T study group decides to accept texts from an ITU-T A.6-qualified standards 
development organization, it notifies the organization about the actions taken concerning those 
texts. The use, acceptance or reproduction of such texts by the ITU-T study group is subject to the 
copyright arrangements set out in 2.4. 
Documents submitted to the ITU-T study groups by ITU-T A.6-qualified standards development 
organizations should conform to criterion 8) in Annex A. 
These documents are not issued as Contributions. As soon as they arrive they are made available, 
with the agreement of the study group chairman, for advance consideration by the relevant group. 
Moreover, they are issued as a document to the relevant group with a reference to the originating 
standards development organization, i.e. as a Temporary Document at a study group or working 
party meeting, or as a document at a rapporteur meeting. In the latter case, the receipt and 
disposition of the document received should be recorded in the report of the rapporteur meeting. 
2.3 ITU-T A.6-qualified organizations list 
The Director of TSB is requested to maintain an up-to-date ITU-T A.6-qualified organizations list 
and associated analyses of the national and regional standards development organizations that are 
under evaluation and/or have been approved for cooperation and exchange of information, 
including identification of the study groups concerned, and make it available online. 
2.4 Copyright arrangements 
The subject of modifications to texts and arrangements for royalty-free copyright licenses, including 
the right to sub-license, for texts accepted by either ITU-T or by ITU-T A.6-qualified standards 
development organizations and their publishers and others, is a matter to be agreed upon between 
TSB and the particular standards development organization. However, the originating organization 
retains the copyright for its texts. 
2.5 Electronic document exchange 
Where possible, the exchange of documents will be in electronic format. Questions of electronic 
links to enable document exchange is to be agreed upon by the Secretariats of the organizations 
concerned. 
  
  Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 3 
 
Annex A 
 
Qualifying criteria for cooperation and exchange of information process 
with national and regional standards development organizations 
(This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
 
NOTE – An administration may require that cooperation and exchange of information with ITU-T or its 
study groups, by a national or regional standards development organization within that administration's 
jurisdiction, follow its established national procedures. 
National or regional standards 
Desired characteristics 
development organization attributes 
1) Objectives/relationship of work to Objectives should be the development, adoption and implementation of standards 
ITU-T work and the provision of input into international standards organizations, especially 
ITU-T. 
2) Organization:  
 – legal status; – should indicate in which country/countries it has legal status; 
 – accreditation; – should indicate the  accrediting entity; 
 – secretariat; – should identify the permanent secretariat; 
 – nominated representative. – should identify a representative. 
3) Membership (openness) – national or regional standards development organization membership criteria 
should not preclude any party with material interest; 
– membership should comprise a significant representation of telecommunications 
interests. 
4) Technical subject  areas Should be relevant to a particular study group(s) or ITU-T as a whole. 
5) IPR Policy and Guidelines on:  
a) patents; a) should be consistent with "Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ ITU-R/ISO/IEC" 
 and "Guidelines for Implementation of the Common Patent Policy for 
 ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC"*); 
b) software copyright (if applicable); b) should be consistent with "ITU-T Software Copyright Guidelines"*); 
c) marks (if applicable); and c) should be consistent with "ITU-T Guidelines related to the inclusion of Marks in 
 ITU-T Recommendations"; 
d) copyright; d) ITU and ITU Member States and Sector Members should have the right to copy 
for standardization-related purposes (see also Rec. ITU-T A.1 with regard to 
 
copying and distribution). 
6) Working methods/processes – should be well-documented; 
– should be open and fair; 
– should support competition; 
– should explicitly consider anti-trust issues. 
National or regional standards Desired characteristics 
development organization attributes 
7) Outputs – outputs available to ITU-T should be identified; 
– process for ITU-T to obtain outputs should be identified. 
8) Documents submitted to ITU-T – should indicate source within the national or regional standards development 
organization ( e.g. committee, subcommittee, etc.); 
– should indicate degree of stability of the document ( e.g. preliminary, mature, 
stable, proposed date of adoption, etc.); 
– should indicate status of document (i.e. working document, draft, interim or 
approved standard). 
* Particularly, licences must be offered on a non-discriminatory basis on reasonable terms and conditions (whether free of charge 
or with monetary compensation) to both members and non-members. 
 
4 Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 
 
Appendix I 
 
Establishment of a process for cooperation and exchange of information under Rec. ITU-T A.6 
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
 
 1  2  3  4 
    
Initiation Evaluation Decision Process once established 
 (includes questionnaire in Annex A)  according to the criteria    = implementation 
        
        
2.1.1 Initiation of the request by an SG  The SG checks the ITU-T  The SG decides to communicate  Communication process put 
A.6-qualified list and reviews into practice by the SG  
the analysis (if not on the list, 
see 2.1.2 b) 
        
2.1.2 a) Initiation of the request by an SDO to  Evaluation by the Director   The Director decides to approve  Communication process put 
the Director for related policy issues and informs TSAG + SGs  into practice by the Director 
        
2.1.2 b) Initiation of the request by an SDO to  The Director performs a  The SG decides to  Communication process put 
the Director for SG issues preliminary analysis, the SG communicate, the SG informs into practice by the SG 
reviews the analysis other SGs TSAG and the 
Director 
        
        
   Director adds the SDO under  Director indicates on the list that   
evaluation to the list the SDO is ITU-T A.6-qualified 
 
5 Rec. ITU-T A.6 (11/2012) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Terminals and subjective and objective assessment methods 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2013 
