 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.12
(10/2008)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION  SECTOR 
OF  ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Identification and layout of ITU-T 
Recommendations 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation ITU-T A.12 
Identification and layout of ITU-T Recommendations 
 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation provides information on the means on assigning the letter series designations 
for ITU-T Recommendations.  
 
 
Source 
Recommendation ITU-T A.12 was prepared by TSAG (2005-2008) and approved by the World 
Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (Johannesburg, 21-30 October 2008). 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.12 (10/2008) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure e.g. interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met.  The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 
©  ITU  2009 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.12 (10/2008) 
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
1 Scope........................................................................................................................................ 1 
2 Identification and layout of Recommendations ....................................................................... 1 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.12 (10/2008) iii 

 
 
Recommendation ITU-T A.12 
Identification and layout of ITU-T Recommendations 
(2000; 2004; 2008) 
1 Scope 
The Telecommunication Standardization Advisory Group (TSAG) periodically reviews the methods of 
identifying and laying out Recommendations as well as the Author's Guide for drafting ITU-T 
Recommendations, prepared and updated by the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB), 
providing thus detailed guidelines on format and style. This Recommendation provides principles that are 
applied in identifying and laying out Recommendations. 
2 Identification and layout of Recommendations 
2.1 All Recommendations of the ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) shall be 
numbered. The number of each Recommendation shall have a letter prefix referring to the series as well as a 
number identifying the particular subject in that series. The numbering shall be done in a manner that permits 
clear, unequivocal identification and facilitates electronic storage of information concerning the 
Recommendation. The Recommendation number shall be associated on the cover with the date of approval 
in the format YYYY. The month may be added if required for uniqueness. 
2.2 The scope of the series identified by the letter shall be as follows: 
A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
B Not allocated 
C Not allocated 
D General tariff principles 
E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
H Audiovisual and multimedia systems  
I Integrated services digital network 
J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
K Protection against interference 
L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
N Maintenance: international sound-programme and television-transmission circuits 
O Specifications of measuring equipment 
P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks 
Q Switching and signalling 
R Telegraph transmission 
S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
T Terminals for telematic services 
  Rec. ITU-T A.12 (10/2008) 1 
 
U Telegraph switching 
V Data communication over the telephone network 
W Not allocated 
X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
2.3 Recommendations in each series shall be classified in sections, according to subject. 
2.4 The title of each Recommendation should be concise (preferably no more than one line) but unique, 
meaningful and unambiguous. The details identifying the precise intent and coverage should be contained in 
the text where possible (e.g., under "Scope" clause). 
2.5 The date of formal approval of the Recommendation, the study group(s) responsible for its approval 
and a record of revisions shall be clearly indicated. 
2.6 The author of a new or revised Recommendation shall provide, in front of the main body of the 
Recommendation, a summary as outlined in the "Author's Guide for drafting ITU-T Recommendations". The 
author may also provide other up-front elements, such as background information and keywords, as provided 
for in the Author's Guide. 
2.7 The "Author's Guide for drafting ITU-T Recommendations" should be applied in drafting new 
Recommendations and, wherever practicable, in revising existing Recommendations. 
 
2 Rec. ITU-T A.12 (10/2008) 
 
 
 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2009 
