 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.2
(11/2012)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR 
OF ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Presentation of contributions to the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.2 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.2 
Presentation of contributions to the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation gives directives on how draft, present and submit contributions to ITU-T 
study groups. 
 
 
History 
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group 
1.0 ITU-T A.1 1984-10-19 Assembly  
2.0 ITU-T A.1 1988-11-25 Assembly  
3.0 ITU-T A.1 1993-03-12 TSAG  
4.0 ITU-T A.2 1996-10-18 Assembly  
5.0 ITU-T A.2 2000-10-06 Assembly  
6.0 ITU-T A.2 2004-10-14 Assembly  
6.1  ITU-T A.2 (2004) Amd. 1 2006-07-07 TSAG  
7.0 ITU-T A.2 2008-10-30 Assembly  
8.0 ITU-T A.2 2012-11-30 Assembly  
 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 ITU 2013 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Page 
Appendix I – Detailed guidelines for the preparation of contributions relative to the study 
of ITU-T Questions ......................................................................................................  3 
I.1 Contents of contribution .................................................................................  3 
I.2 Mechanics and presentation ...........................................................................  4 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) iii 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.2 
Presentation of contributions to the ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector 
(1984; 1988; 1993; 1996; 2000; 2004; 2008; 2012) 
1 With regard to the presentation of contributions to the study of Questions assigned to the 
ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), the following general directives should be 
applied: 
a) Contributions should be concisely drafted, avoiding unnecessary details, tables or statistics 
that make no direct contribution to the study of a Question. They should be clearly written 
with a view to being universally understood, i.e. they should be as codified as possible, use 
international terminology and avoid the technical jargon peculiar to the author's country. 
Contributors should use the units, letter symbols and graphical symbols of the international 
system of units (SI) as supported by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). In addition, Coordinated 
Universal Time (UTC) should be used to designate time.  
b) A contribution should not, as a rule, exceed about 2500 words (requiring no more than five 
printed pages to be distributed), nor should it include more than three pages of figures 
(making eight pages in all). It should be accompanied by an abstract that is no more than 
150-200 words, and which summarizes the aim of the contribution and its technical content. 
Whenever possible, a section with the heading Rationale (or Discussion) should be used for 
the main text, which sets forth the essential information required for justifying the 
proposals or conclusions of the contribution. The contribution should end with a Proposal 
or, if not feasible, a Conclusion (both if required). For self-explanatory proposals, the 
rationale section may be omitted. These directives do not apply to draft Recommendations. 
c) Documents of purely theoretical interest that are not directly related to the Questions under 
study should not be submitted. 
d) Articles that have been or are to be published in the technical press should not be submitted 
to ITU-T, unless they relate directly to Questions under study. 
e) Passages of an unduly commercial nature included in a contribution may be deleted by the 
Director of the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) in agreement with the 
chairman; the author of the contribution shall be advised of any such deletions. 
Detailed guidelines recommended for the preparation of contributions are provided in Appendix I. 
Details on the presentation of ITU-T texts can be found in the "Author's Guide for drafting ITU-T 
Recommendations" (referred to as "Guide" in the following). 
2 With regard to the submission of contributions and TDs (including liaison statements), all 
documents to ITU-T should, as far as possible, be sent using electronic means; if no such facilities 
are available to the contributor, submission of paper only copies is acceptable. 
Electronic submission facilities include e-mail and the ITU web-based interface. Detailed 
information and instructions for these methods are maintained by TSB on the ITU-T website and 
disseminated periodically via TSB circular.  
If contributions are submitted as paper documents, they shall be addressed to TSB and copied to the 
study group chairmen and vice-chairmen, working party chairmen and concerned rapporteur(s). 
3 Contributions should be printable in A4 format, as far as possible. The first page must have 
the standard layout of ITU-T contributions. Drafts must be in one or more of the official and 
working languages of the Union. When existing ITU-T texts already translated have been used in 
some parts of a contribution, a copy of the contribution with a precise reference to the original 
  Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) 1 
 
sources also should be sent to TSB. If ITU-T figures are used in the contributions, the ITU-T 
number must not be deleted, but if the figure has been modified, the abbreviation "mod" should be 
added after the number. If not required by further development of the text, use of colours in the text 
of contributions or other submitted documents should be avoided. 
4 If a contribution contains electronic material (software, test data, etc., referred to herein as 
"software"), it should be attached to the text sent to TSB. 
Contributors are encouraged to submit formal language descriptions as electronic attachments. 
 
  
2 Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) 
 
Appendix I 
 
Detailed guidelines for the preparation of contributions 
relative to the study of ITU-T Questions 
(This appendix does not form an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
NOTE – These guidelines will be updated by TSB as necessary. The updated version will be maintained on 
the ITU-T website and issued in a TSB circular. 
The guidelines in this appendix supplement the general directives set out in Recommendation 
ITU-T A.2. For ease of reference, they are organized under relevant headings in two categories: one 
deals with the contents of the contribution and the other with the mechanics of its presentation. 
I.1 Contents of contribution 
A contribution should be clear, concise and comprehensive in itself. It should start with the Heading 
and the Abstract, which are independent sections. The main text of the contribution should contain 
two sections: Rationale (or Discussion) and Proposal (or Conclusion). Supplementary sections such 
as annexes, if necessary, should follow the main text. The guidelines for the structure of the main 
text do not apply to draft Recommendations or to submission by rapporteurs. 
I.1.1 Heading – The heading of a contribution submitted to TSB should provide: 
– study group Question number(s) that the contribution is addressing; 
– place and date of the meeting to which the contribution is directed; 
– study group and working party to which the contribution should be submitted; 
– source of the contribution: originating country and/or organization; 
– title of the contribution; 
– contact information for the contribution originator and/or representative: name, 
organization, country, telephone, fax and e-mail address. 
A template that defines the recommended heading format is available (under "Guides, Tools, and 
Templates") on the ITU-T study group and TSAG websites. 
I.1.2 Abstract – The abstract should outline clearly and concisely the aim (for example, proposal 
for a new Recommendation) and the content (proposals and/or conclusions of the contribution). In 
addition, it should enable prospective readers to determine quickly whether the contribution 
contains information in their area of interest and, often, which working party(ies) should review the 
contribution. This is a very important part of the document and would normally be prepared after 
the other sections are written. An abstract should not exceed 150-200 words. It should be 
understandable by other study groups and not just the intended readers of the contribution. 
I.1.3 Rationale (Discussion) – This section should provide discussion, reasons and justification 
for the proposals or conclusions. It develops the theme, describing the methods used and the 
observations or findings, and comments on their significance. 
I.1.4 Proposal (Conclusion) – The main text should end with a conclusion that, whenever 
possible, should be in the form of a concrete proposal indicating the intended disposition of the 
contribution. It would be useful to make the following distinction between Proposal and 
Conclusion, so that a standard approach to their application may be adopted. The heading Proposal 
should be used when the section offers suggestions for acceptance (such as solutions, plans and 
changes the contributor expects to be implemented) and when decisions or actions are requested. 
The heading Conclusion should be used when it is merely informational, such as summarizing 
observations and no decision about a course of action is expected. If both appear in a contribution, 
the proposals should follow the conclusions. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) 3 
 
I.1.5 Supplementary Sections – Supporting or more detailed information that might interrupt the 
flow of ideas in the main text should be placed in the sections containing annexes, appendices, 
references and attachments. A solid line can be used to separate such sections from the main text. 
"The Guide" describes the distinction between the uses of Annex and Appendix. 
I.2 Mechanics and presentation 
I.2.1 Clause numbering – The contribution should be structured logically and, whenever clarity 
and flow demand, hierarchically, with discrete clauses and subclauses for presenting different levels 
of detail. Different clauses and subclauses in the main text should be designated with decimal 
numbers, adhering as much as possible to the hierarchical numbering system recommended for 
ITU-T texts (see "Guide"); for example, 1.1, 1.2.3. Examples for numbering the supplementary 
sections are A.1.1 of Annex A and VI.3.4 of Appendix VI. 
I.2.2 Page numbering – The title page should be left unnumbered. All the following pages 
should be numbered consecutively from page 2, including tables, annexes, appendices or 
attachments. Page numbers should normally be centred at the top of the page. Each page should 
include the document number (if available) immediately below the page number. It is useful to 
show the total number of pages with the page number, e.g. 2 of 10. 
I.2.3 Figures and diagrams – Figures and diagrams must be clear and legible when printed in A4 
format. 
I.2.4 Formulae – Mathematical formulae should only be presented for explaining texts. Details 
of how they are derived should be avoided. 
I.2.5 Quotations – Simple reference to the document number or paragraph number of an existing 
text or key phrase should be used instead of lengthy quotes. Material available elsewhere in ITU-T 
should not be reproduced or quoted at length. Excerpts or brief summaries may be included in the 
contribution when it is known that the members of the ITU-T study group do not have ready access 
to such material. 
I.2.6 References – Reference to other ITU-T contributions or Recommendations should be made 
by using the official document number, e.g. COM 14-10. If the referenced contribution belongs to a 
previous study period, this fact should be noted as well. 
References to standards other than ITU or ISO/IEC publications or standards should conform to the 
requirements of Recommendation ITU-T A.5. Other publications not covered by Recommendation 
ITU-T A.5 may be referenced in a Bibliography.  
(See "Guide" for more information on references and bibliographies.) 
I.2.7 Revision to existing text – If a contribution proposes modifications to an existing text,  
e.g. draft Recommendation, the portions of the text to be modified should be clearly shown with 
revision marks. Adequate indications shall also be given to identify any changes proposed with 
regard to the previous version of the same text. 
Such change indications could be made, for example, by strikethrough, underlining and by vertical 
revision bars (|) appearing at the margin of the page.  
 
 
 
 
4 Rec. ITU-T A.2 (11/2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Terminals and subjective and objective assessment methods 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2013 
