 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.8
(10/2008)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION  SECTOR 
OF  ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Alternative approval process for new and 
revised ITU-T Recommendations 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.8 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendation ITU-T A.8 
Alternative approval process for new and revised  
ITU-T Recommendations 
 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation provides working methods and procedures for approving draft new and 
revised ITU-T Recommendations using the alternative approval process. 
 
 
Source 
Recommendation ITU-T A.8 was prepared by TSAG (2005-2008) and approved by the World 
Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (Johannesburg, 21-30 October 2008). 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure e.g. interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met.  The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 
©  ITU  2009 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008)  
 
CONTENTS 
 Page 
1 General ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
2 Process ..................................................................................................................................... 1 
3 Prerequisites ............................................................................................................................. 1 
4 Last call and additional review................................................................................................. 2 
5 Procedure at study group meetings .......................................................................................... 3 
6 Notification .............................................................................................................................. 4 
7 Correction of defects................................................................................................................ 5 
8 Deletion of Recommendations................................................................................................. 5 
8.1  Deletion of Recommendations by WTSA ................................................................ 5 
8.2  Deletion of Recommendations between WTSAs ..................................................... 5 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) iii 

 
 
Recommendation ITU-T A.8 
Alternative approval process for new and revised  
ITU-T Recommendations 
(2000; 2004; 2006; 2008) 
1 General 
1.1 Recommendations of the ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) will be approved 
using this alternative approval process (AAP), except Recommendations that have policy or regulatory 
implications, which will be approved using the traditional approval process (TAP) found in Resolution 1 of 
the World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA). 
The competent study group may also seek approval at a WTSA. 
1.2 In accordance with the ITU Convention, the status of Recommendations approved is the same for 
both AAP and TAP methods of approval. 
2 Process 
2.1 Study groups should apply the AAP described below for seeking the approval of draft new and 
revised Recommendations as soon as they have been developed to a sufficiently mature state. See Figure 1 
for the sequence of events. 
3 Prerequisites 
3.1 Upon request of the study group chairman, the Director of the Telecommunication Standardization 
Bureau (TSB) shall announce the intention to apply AAP and to initiate the last call set out in this 
Recommendation (see clause 4 below). Such action shall be based upon consent at a study group or working 
party meeting or, exceptionally, at a WTSA, that a draft Recommendation is sufficiently mature for such 
action. At this stage, the draft Recommendation is considered to have "CONSENT". The Director shall 
include a summary of the draft Recommendation in the announcement. Reference shall be provided to the 
documentation where the text of the draft new or revised Recommendation to be considered may be found. 
This information shall be made available to all Member States and Sector Members. 
3.2 The text of the draft new or revised Recommendation must be available to TSB in a final edited 
form at the time that the Director makes the announcement of the intended application of the AAP set out in 
this Recommendation. Any associated electronic material included in the Recommendation (e.g., software, 
test vectors, etc.) must also be made available to TSB at the same time. A summary that reflects the final 
edited text of the draft Recommendation must also be provided to TSB, in accordance with clause 3.3 below.  
3.3 Such a summary should be prepared in accordance with the Author's Guide for drafting ITU-T 
Recommendations. This summary is a brief outline of the purpose and content of the new or revised draft 
Recommendation and, where appropriate, the intent of the revisions. No Recommendation shall be 
considered as complete and ready for approval without this summary statement. 
3.4 Approval may only be sought for a draft new or revised Recommendation within the study group's 
mandate as defined by the Questions allocated to it, in accordance with No. 192 of the Convention. 
Alternatively, or additionally, approval may be sought for amendment of an existing Recommendation 
within the study group's responsibility and mandate. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) 1 
 
3.5 Where a draft new or revised Recommendation falls within the mandate of more than one study 
group, the chairman of the study group proposing the approval should consult and take into account the 
views of any other study group chairmen concerned before proceeding with the application of this approval 
procedure. 
3.6 Recommendations are to be elaborated in accordance with the Common Patent Policy for  
ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. For example:  
3.6.1 Any party participating in the work of ITU-T should, from the outset, draw the attention of the 
Director of TSB to any known patent or to any known pending patent application, either of their own or of 
other organizations. The "Patent Statement and Licensing Declaration" form from the ITU-T website is to be 
used.  
3.6.2 ITU-T non-member organizations that hold patent(s) or pending patent application(s), the use of 
which may be required in order to implement an ITU-T Recommendation, can submit a "Patent Statement 
and Licensing Declaration" to TSB using the form available at the ITU-T website. 
3.7 In the interests of stability, once a new or revised Recommendation has been approved, approval 
should not normally be sought within a reasonable period of time for any further amendment of that new text 
or that revised portion, respectively, unless the proposed amendment complements rather than changes the 
agreement reached in the previous approval process, or a significant error or omission is discovered. As a 
guideline, in this context "a reasonable period of time" would be at least two years, in most cases. 
Amendments that correct defects may be approved, in accordance with clause 7.1. 
4 Last call and additional review 
4.1 The last call encompasses the four-week time period and procedures beginning with the Director's 
announcement of the intention to apply the alternative approval process (clause 3.1). 
4.2 If TSB has received a statement(s) indicating that the use of intellectual property, protected by one 
or more copyright(s) or patent(s), issued or pending, may be required in order to implement a draft 
Recommendation, the Director shall post this information on the ITU-T website. 
4.3 The Director of TSB shall advise the Directors of the other two Bureaux that Member States and 
Sector Members are being asked to comment on the approval of a proposed new or revised 
Recommendation. 
4.4 During the last call, should any Member State or Sector Member be of the opinion that the draft 
new or revised Recommendation should not be approved, they should advise their reasons for disapproving 
and indicate the possible changes that would facilitate further consideration and approval of the draft new or 
revised Recommendation. TSB will make the comments available to the membership of ITU-T. 
4.4.1 If no comments, other than comments indicating typographical error(s) (misspelling, syntactical and 
punctuation mistakes, etc.), are received by the end of the last call, the draft new or revised Recommendation 
is considered as approved, and the typographical errors are corrected.  
4.4.2  If comments, other than those indicating typographical errors, are received by the end of the last 
call, the study group chairman, in consultation with TSB, makes the judgement whether:  
1) a planned study group meeting is sufficiently close to consider the draft Recommendation for 
approval, in which case the procedures in clause 4.6 regarding approval at a study group meeting 
are applied; or  
2) to save time and/or because of the nature and maturity of the work, comment resolution should be 
initiated under the direction of the study group chairman. This will be accomplished by appropriate 
2 Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008)  
 
study group experts, via electronic correspondence or at meetings. Revised, edited draft text is 
prepared, as appropriate, and the procedures beginning in clause 4.4.3 are applied. 
4.4.3 After comment resolution is completed, and the revised and edited draft text is made available, the 
study group chairman, in consultation with TSB, makes the judgement whether:  
a) a planned study group meeting is sufficiently close to consider the draft Recommendation for 
approval, in which case the procedures in clause 4.6 are applied; or 
b) to save time and/or because of the nature and maturity of the work, an additional review should be 
initiated, in which case the procedures in clause 4.5 are applied. 
4.5 The additional review encompasses a three-week time period and will be announced by the 
Director. The text (including any revisions as a result of comment resolution) of the draft Recommendation 
in a final edited form and comments from the last call must be made available to TSB at the time that the 
Director makes the announcement of the additional review. Reference shall be provided to the 
documentation where the text of the draft Recommendation and last call comments to be considered may be 
found.  
4.5.1 If no comments, other than comments indicating typographical error(s) (misspelling, syntactical and 
punctuation mistakes, etc.), are received by the end of the additional review, the Recommendation is 
considered as approved, and the typographical errors are corrected by TSB.  
4.5.2 If comments, other than comments indicating typographical errors(s), are received by the end of the 
additional review, then the procedures in clause 4.6 regarding approval at a study group meeting are applied.  
4.6 The Director shall explicitly announce the intention to approve the draft Recommendation at least 
three weeks prior to the study group meeting. The Director shall include the specific intent of the proposal in 
summarized form. Reference shall be provided to the documentation where the draft text and comments from 
the last call (and additional review, if relevant) may be found. The edited text of the draft Recommendation 
from the additional review (or last call if there is no additional review) is submitted for approval by the study 
group meeting in accordance with clause 5 below. 
5 Procedure at study group meetings 
5.1 The study group should review the text of the draft new or revised Recommendation and the 
associated comments referred to in clause 4.6 above. The meeting may then accept any corrections or 
amendments to the draft new or revised Recommendation. The study group should reassess the summary 
statement in terms of its completeness. 
5.2 Changes may only be made during the meeting as a consequence of written comments as a result of 
the last call, additional review, contributions, or temporary documents including liaison statements. Where 
proposals for such revisions are found to be justified but to have a major impact on the intent of the 
Recommendation or to depart from points of principle agreed at the previous study group or working party 
meeting, consideration of this approval procedure should not be applied at this meeting. However, in 
justified circumstances, the approval procedure may still be applied if the chairman of the study group, in 
consultation with TSB, considers: 
– that the proposed changes are reasonable (in the context of the documentation described in this 
clause) for those Member States and Sector Members not represented at the meeting, or not 
represented adequately under the changed circumstances; and 
– that the proposed text is stable. 
However, if a Member State present declares that this text has policy or regulatory implications or there is a 
doubt, the approval procedure shall proceed according to Resolution 1, clause 9.3 or clause 5.8 below. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) 3 
 
5.3 After debate at the study group meeting, the decision of the meeting to approve the 
Recommendation under this approval procedure must be unopposed (but see clauses 5.5, 5.7 and 5.8). Every 
effort should be made to reach unopposed agreement. 
5.4 If, despite these attempts, unopposed agreement has not been reached, the Recommendation is 
considered as approved if, following consultation with their Sector Members present, no more than one 
Member State present in the meeting opposes the decision to approve the Recommendation (but see clauses 
5.5, 5.6 and 5.8). Otherwise, the study group may authorize additional work to address the remaining issues.  
5.5 In cases where a Member State or Sector Member does not elect to oppose approval of a text, but 
would like to register a degree of concern on one or more aspects, this shall be noted in the report of the 
meeting. Such concerns shall be mentioned in a concise note appended to the text of the Recommendation 
concerned. 
5.6 A decision must be reached during the meeting on the basis of a text available in its final form to all 
participants at the meeting. Exceptionally, but only during the meeting, a Member State may request more 
time to consider its position for clause 5.4 above. Unless the Director of TSB is advised of their opposition 
within a period of four weeks from the end of the meeting, the Recommendation is approved and the 
Director shall proceed in accordance with clause 6.1. 
5.6.1 A Member State that requested more time to consider its position and that then indicates 
disapproval within the four-week interval specified in clause 5.6 above is requested to include its reasons and 
to indicate the possible changes that would facilitate further consideration, if required, for future approval of 
the draft new or revised Recommendation.  
5.7 A Member State or Sector Member may advise at the meeting that it is abstaining from the 
application of the procedure. Their presence shall then be ignored for the purposes of clause 5.3 above. Such 
an abstention may subsequently be revoked, but only during the course of the meeting. 
5.8 If the draft new or revised Recommendation is not approved, the study group chairman, after 
consultation with the parties concerned, may proceed according to clause 3.1 above, without further 
CONSENT at a subsequent working party or study group meeting. 
6 Notification 
6.1 The Director of TSB shall promptly notify the membership of the results (indicating approval or 
non-approval) of the last call and additional review. 
6.2 Within two weeks of the closing date of the study group meeting described in clauses 5.3 to 5.5 
above or, exceptionally, two weeks after the period described in clause 5.6, the Director shall notify whether 
the text is approved or not by a circular. The Director shall arrange for this information to also be included in 
the next available ITU Operational Bulletin. Within this same time period, the Director shall also ensure that 
any Recommendation approved is available online, with an indication that the Recommendation may not be 
in its final publication form. 
6.3 Should minor, purely editorial amendments or correction of evident oversights or inconsistencies in 
the text as presented for approval be necessary, TSB may correct these with the approval of the chairman of 
the study group. 
6.4 The Secretary-General shall publish the approved new or revised Recommendations as soon as 
practicable, indicating, as necessary, a date of entry into effect. However, in accordance with 
Recommendation ITU-T A.11, minor amendments may be covered by corrigenda rather than a complete 
reissue. Also, where appropriate, texts may be grouped to suit market needs. 
4 Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008)  
 
6.5 Text shall be added to the cover sheets of all new and revised Recommendations urging users to 
consult the ITU-T patent database and the ITU-T software copyright database. Suggested wording is: 
 "ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation 
may involve the use of a claimed intellectual property right. ITU takes no position concerning the 
evidence, validity or applicability of claimed intellectual property rights, whether asserted by ITU 
Member States and Sector Members or by others outside of the Recommendation development 
process." 
 "As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had/had not received notice of intellectual 
property, protected by patents/software copyrights, which may be required to implement this 
Recommendation. However, implementers are cautioned that this may not represent the latest 
information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the appropriate ITU-T databases available at 
the ITU-T website." 
6.6 See Recommendation ITU-T A.11 concerning the publication of new and revised 
Recommendations. 
7 Correction of defects 
7.1 When a study group identifies the need for implementers to be made aware of defects 
(e.g., typographical errors, editorial errors, ambiguities, omissions or inconsistencies and technical errors) in 
a Recommendation, one mechanism that may be employed is an implementers' guide. This guide is a 
historical document recording all identified defects and their status of correction, from their identification to 
final resolution. Implementers' guides shall be agreed by the study group, or agreed by one of its working 
parties with the concurrence of the study group chairman. Implementers' guides shall be made available by 
posting on the ITU-T website with open access. 
8 Deletion of Recommendations 
Study groups may decide in each individual case which of the following alternatives is the most appropriate 
one. 
8.1 Deletion of Recommendations by WTSA 
Upon the decision of the study group, the chairman shall include in his report to WTSA the request to delete 
a Recommendation. WTSA may approve this request. 
8.2 Deletion of Recommendations between WTSAs 
8.2.1 At a study group meeting it may be agreed to delete a Recommendation, i.e. because it has been 
superseded by another Recommendation or because it has become obsolete. This agreement by the Member 
States and Sector Members present at the meeting must be unopposed. If unopposed agreement has not been 
reached, the same criteria as in clause 5.4 above are applied. Information about this agreement, including an 
explanatory summary about the reasons for the deletion, shall be provided by a circular. If no objection to the 
deletion is received from a Member State or a Sector Member within three months, the deletion will come 
into force. In the case of objection, the matter will be referred back to the study group. 
8.2.2 Notification of the result will be given in another circular, and TSAG will be informed by a report 
from the Director of TSB. In addition, the Director shall publish a list of deleted Recommendations 
whenever appropriate, but at least once by the middle of a study period. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) 5 
 
Approved
LC
(a) 3 weeks
4 weeks Approved
4
(b)
Director's SG
SG or Edited Director's
(c)
announcement Meeting
WP text announcement
meeting for LC and posting Comment and posting () 6
() 1 () 2 for LC resolution AR () 5
(a) (b)
(7)
3 weeks Approved
() 3
911
(b)
(a)
Edited Director's Director's
text announcement notification
for AR and posting and publication
LC:    Last Call
() 8 for AR (see ITU-T. A.11)
AR:    Additional Review
() 10 () 12
A.8(08)_F01
 
Figure 1 – Sequence of events  
Notes to Figure 1 – AAP sequence of events 
1) SG or WP consent – The study group or working party concludes that the work on a draft 
Recommendation is sufficiently mature to begin the alternative approval process and to initiate the 
last call (clause 3.1). 
2) Edited text available – The final, edited, draft text, including summary, is provided to TSB, and the 
study group chairman requests the Director to initiate the last call (clause 3.2). Any associated 
electronic material included in the Recommendation must also be made available to TSB at the 
same time. 
3) Director's last call announcement and posting – The Director announces the beginning of the last 
call to all Member States, Sector Members and Associates, with reference to the summary and 
complete text. If the draft Recommendation has not already been electronically posted, it is done at 
this time (clause 3.1). 
4) Last call judgement – The study group chairman, in consultation with TSB, makes the judgement 
whether: 
a) no comments other than those indicating typographical errors have been received. In this case, 
the Recommendation is considered as approved (clause 4.4.1); 
b) a planned study group meeting is sufficiently close to consider the comments received 
(clause 4.4.2); or  
c) to save time and/or because of the nature and maturity of the work, comment resolution should 
be initiated leading to the preparation of edited texts (clause 4.4.2). 
5) Director's study group announcement and posting – The Director announces that the next study 
group meeting will consider the draft Recommendation for approval and will include reference to 
either: 
a) the draft Recommendation (the edited text (LC) version) plus the comments received from the 
last call (clause 4.6); or 
b) if comment resolution has been carried out, the revised draft Recommendation text. If the 
revised draft Recommendation has not already been electronically posted, it is done at this time 
(clause 4.6). 
6) Study group decision meeting – The study group meeting reviews and addresses all written 
comments and either: 
a) proceeds under WTSA Resolution 1 or clause 5.8, as appropriate, if there might be policy or 
regulatory implications (clause 5.2); or 
6 Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008)  
 
b) approves the draft Recommendation (clause 5.3 or 5.4); or  
c) does not approve the draft Recommendation. If it is concluded that a further attempt at 
addressing comments received is appropriate, then additional work should be done and the 
process returns to step 2 (without further CONSENT at a working party or study group 
meeting) (clause 5.8). 
7) Comment resolution – The study group chairman, with assistance from TSB and experts, via 
electronic correspondence and rapporteur and working party meetings, where appropriate, addresses 
the comments and prepares a new edited draft Recommendation text (clause 4.4.2). 
8) Edited text available – The revised edited text, including summary, is provided to TSB 
(clause 4.4.2). 
9) Next step judgement – The study group chairman, in consultation with TSB, makes the judgement 
whether: 
a) a planned study group meeting is sufficiently close to consider the draft Recommendation for 
approval (clause 4.4.3 a); or  
b) to save time and/or because of the nature and maturity of the work, an additional review should 
be initiated (clause 4.4.3 b). 
10) Director's additional review announcement and posting – The Director announces the beginning of 
the additional review to all Member States and Sector Members, with reference to the summary and 
complete text of the revised draft Recommendation. If the revised draft Recommendation has not 
already been electronically posted, it is done at this time (clause 4.5). 
11) Additional review judgement – The study group chairman, in consultation with TSB, makes the 
judgement whether: 
a) no comments other than those indicating typographical errors have been received. In this case, 
the Recommendation is considered approved (clause 4.5.1); or 
b) comments other than those indicating typographical errors have been received. In this case, the 
process proceeds to the study group meeting (clause 4.5.2). 
12) Director's notification – The Director notifies the members that the draft Recommendation has been 
approved (clause 6.1 or 6.2). 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.8 (10/2008) 7 


 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Telephone transmission quality, telephone installations, local line networks 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2009 
