 
 
 
 
International Telecommunication Union 
 
 
ITU-T 
A.11
(11/2012)  
TELECOMMUNICATION 
STANDARDIZATION SECTOR 
OF ITU 
 
SERIES A: ORGANIZATION OF THE WORK OF ITU-T 
 
 
Publication of ITU-T Recommendations and 
World Telecommunication Standardization 
Assembly proceedings 
 
Recommendation  ITU-T  A.11 
 
 
 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.11 
Publication of ITU-T Recommendations and World Telecommunication 
Standardization Assembly proceedings 
 
 
 
Summary 
This Recommendation provides information on the procedures to be followed for publication of 
ITU-T Recommendations and the results of WTSAs. 
 
 
History 
Edition Recommendation Approval Study Group 
1.0 ITU-T A.11 2000-10-06 Assembly  
2.0 ITU-T A.11 2004-10-14 Assembly  
3.0 ITU-T A.11 2008-10-30 Assembly  
4.0 ITU-T A.11 2012-11-30 Assembly  
 
 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) i 
 
FOREWORD 
The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) is the United Nations specialized agency in the field of 
telecommunications, information and communication technologies (ICTs). The ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is a permanent organ of ITU. ITU-T is responsible for studying technical, 
operating and tariff questions and issuing Recommendations on them with a view to standardizing 
telecommunications on a worldwide basis. 
The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), which meets every four years, 
establishes the topics for study by the ITU-T study groups which, in turn, produce Recommendations on 
these topics. 
The approval of ITU-T Recommendations is covered by the procedure laid down in WTSA Resolution 1. 
In some areas of information technology which fall within ITU-T's purview, the necessary standards are 
prepared on a collaborative basis with ISO and IEC. 
 
 
 
NOTE 
In this Recommendation, the expression "Administration" is used for conciseness to indicate both a 
telecommunication administration and a recognized operating agency. 
Compliance with this Recommendation is voluntary. However, the Recommendation may contain certain 
mandatory provisions (to ensure, e.g., interoperability or applicability) and compliance with the 
Recommendation is achieved when all of these mandatory provisions are met. The words "shall" or some 
other obligatory language such as "must" and the negative equivalents are used to express requirements. The 
use of such words does not suggest that compliance with the Recommendation is required of any party. 
 
 
 
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS 
ITU draws attention to the possibility that the practice or implementation of this Recommendation may 
involve the use of a claimed Intellectual Property Right. ITU takes no position concerning the evidence, 
validity or applicability of claimed Intellectual Property Rights, whether asserted by ITU members or others 
outside of the Recommendation development process. 
As of the date of approval of this Recommendation, ITU had not received notice of intellectual property, 
protected by patents, which may be required to implement this Recommendation. However, implementers 
are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information and are therefore strongly urged to consult the 
TSB patent database at http://www.itu.int/ITU-T/ipr/. 
 
 
 
 ITU 2013 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, by any means whatsoever, without the 
prior written permission of ITU. 
ii Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) 
 
Table of Contents 
 Page 
1 Introduction ..................................................................................................................  1 
2 Publication of Recommendations .................................................................................  1 
3 Publication of WTSA proceedings ...............................................................................  1 
4 Associated activities .....................................................................................................  2 
5 Relation with the Council .............................................................................................  2 
Annex A – Guidelines on publication of ITU-T Recommendations .......................................  3 
 
 
 
  Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) iii 

 
Recommendation ITU-T A.11 
Publication of ITU-T Recommendations and World Telecommunication 
Standardization Assembly proceedings 
(2000; 2004; 2008; 2012) 
1 Introduction 
Under No. 98 of the ITU Convention, the Secretary-General is charged with the task of publishing 
Recommendations, and Recommendation ITU-T A.12 of the ITU Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) sets out the identification and layout of ITU-T Recommendations. 
In addition to the publication of ITU-T Recommendations, the procedures for publishing the 
proceedings of the World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA) are specified 
below. 
It should be noted that although the designation "CCITT" has not been applied to new publications 
for some time, references to CCITT and ITU-T Recommendations are contained in numerous legal 
documents throughout the world. 
2 Publication of Recommendations 
2.1 Each new and revised Recommendation should be made available to the public as soon as 
practicable after it has been approved, and in each language as soon as it is available (see Annex A). 
2.2 Each new and revised Recommendation should be added to a directly accessible database 
of ITU-T Recommendations. 
2.3 The collection of approved Recommendations should also be published on an appropriate 
distribution medium. 
2.4 Adequate indexing should be provided on all media. 
2.5 The current status of each Recommendation in the complete range of Recommendations, 
including those approved by CCITT prior to 1993, should be accessible online. 
3 Publication of WTSA proceedings 
3.1 To provide a record of the proceedings of each assembly, an ITU-T Book should be 
published with the contents restricted to the following in principle: 
– Resolutions and Opinions adopted by the assembly; 
– Recommendations on the organization of the work of ITU-T (A-series); 
– a list of the study groups, the advisory group and any other groups established or 
maintained by the assembly, with their titles and general areas of work; 
– titles of the Questions (continuing or newly approved for study) and their allocation; 
– reports of the committees of the assembly. 
NOTE – The list of participants and list of documents of the assembly may be provided in the book, or 
pointers may be provided as to where the online list of participants and the online list of documents of the 
assembly may be found. 
3.2 Resolutions and ITU-T A-series Recommendations should also be published individually in 
electronic form. 
  Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) 1 
 
3.3 The colour of the cover of the ITU-T Book recording the results of WTSA will rotate 
successively through the colours of previous books in their chronological order, i.e. white, green, 
orange, yellow, red and blue. 
4 Associated activities 
4.1 The Director of the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) should observe the 
annexed guidelines (see Annex A) when managing the continuing process of publishing 
Recommendations during the upcoming study period. 
4.2 The Director of TSB should report to the next WTSA and to the intervening meetings of 
TSAG on any difficulties encountered in the timely publication of texts, with proposals for remedial 
action. 
5 Relation with the Council 
The Director of TSB should invite the Council to consider what adjustments, if any, may be needed 
to the ITU policy on publication, pricing, etc., in order to facilitate the rapid, wide and effective 
dissemination of ITU-T Recommendations. 
 
 
2 Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) 
 
Annex A 
 
Guidelines on publication of ITU-T Recommendations 
(This annex forms an integral part of this Recommendation.) 
A.1 The following guidelines have been drawn up to assist in the timely publication of the 
approved ITU-T Recommendations. These guidelines should apply to those ITU services involved 
in the publication and distribution of Recommendations, and (to the extent relevant) to other 
organizations permitted by ITU to publish and distribute Recommendations under conditions and 
arrangements established with ITU. 
A.2 From the users' viewpoint, the main principles that need to be applied are: 
a) the maximum feasible use of electronic publishing of Recommendations through direct 
online access to databases that are updated as soon as possible after approval of the 
Recommendations and by periodic publication on an appropriate distribution medium; 
b) unambiguous labelling of Recommendations to identify successive versions (see 
Recommendation ITU-T A.12); 
c) convenient (e.g. online or on a distribution medium) access to appropriate guidance and 
definitive information on prices, availability and current status of Recommendations; 
d) simple-to-use indexes and search facilities to locate specific subjects without necessarily 
knowing the titles or understanding the general structure and letter series used to designate 
ITU-T Recommendations. 
A.3 Immediately after the conditions for its approval have been met, a new or revised 
Recommendation should be made available to the public, in accordance with the conditions 
established by ITU. 
1
Recommendations should be made available in appropriate formats, such as: 
• online access – as soon as practicable; 
• DVD – periodically (e.g. quarterly). 
Minor modifications may be covered by publishing amendments or corrigenda rather than reissuing 
the complete Recommendation. 
A.4 The current status of the complete range of Recommendations must be accessible on a 
database at any time. 
A.5 Adequate indexing and search facilities should be provided. 
A.6 For research and reference purposes, ITU should maintain permanently in an archive an 
official copy of all Recommendations that are or have been valid. 
A.7 The generally accessible online database of Recommendations should contain versions of 
Recommendations currently in force and versions previously in force since the 1988 Blue Book. 
A.8 ITU copyright should be strictly enforced on all formats of ITU-T Recommendations. 
____________________ 
1
  Paper copies should be made available as quickly as possible at the request of a Member State, Sector 
Member or Associate not possessing electronic facilities, by which they can access publications of the 
Union 
  Rec. ITU-T A.11 (11/2012) 3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
SERIES OF ITU-T RECOMMENDATIONS 
Series A Organization of the work of ITU-T 
Series D General tariff principles 
Series E Overall network operation, telephone service, service operation and human factors 
Series F Non-telephone telecommunication services 
Series G Transmission systems and media, digital systems and networks 
Series H Audiovisual and multimedia systems 
Series I Integrated services digital network 
Series J Cable networks and transmission of television, sound programme and other multimedia signals 
Series K Protection against interference 
Series L Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant 
Series M Telecommunication management, including TMN and network maintenance 
Series N Maintenance: international sound programme and television transmission circuits 
Series O Specifications of measuring equipment 
Series P Terminals and subjective and objective assessment methods 
Series Q Switching and signalling 
Series R Telegraph transmission 
Series S Telegraph services terminal equipment 
Series T Terminals for telematic services 
Series U Telegraph switching 
Series V Data communication over the telephone network 
Series X Data networks, open system communications and security 
Series Y Global information infrastructure, Internet protocol aspects and next-generation networks 
Series Z Languages and general software aspects for telecommunication systems 
  
 
 
Printed in Switzerland 
Geneva, 2013 
